Q1. What are the ways to assign a certain colour to an element in CSS?
CSS can assign a wide range of colours to elements using different notations. There are three notations as of now that are used that are explained below:

Hexadecimal notation
A colour in hexadecimal string notation always begins with the character “#”. After that, the hexadecimal digits of the colour code is written. The string is case-insensitive.
RGB functional notation
RGB (Red/Green/Blue) functional notation, like hexadecimal string notation, represents colours using their red, green, and blue components (as well as, optionally, an alpha channel component for opacity). However, instead of using a string, the colour is defined using the CSS function RGB(). This function accepts as its input parameters the values of the red, green, and blue components and an optional fourth parameter, the value for the alpha channel.
HSL functional notation
Designers and artists often prefer to work using the HSL (Hue/Saturation/Luminosity) colour method. On the web, HSL colours are represented using HSL functional notation. The HSL() CSS function is very similar to the RGB() function in usage otherwise

Q2. Explain the CSS Box Model and its different elements.
The CSS box model describes the rectangular boxes that are generated for elements in the document tree and laid out according to the visual formatting model. Each box has a content area (e.g. text, an image, etc.) and an optional surrounding padding, border, and margin areas.

The CSS box model is responsible for calculating:

How much space a block element takes up.
Whether or not borders and/or margins overlap, or collapse.
A box’s dimensions.
Box Model - css interview questions - edureka

The box model has the following rules:

The dimensions of a block element are calculated by width, height, padding, borders, and margin.
If no height is specified, a block element will be as high as the content it contains, plus padding.
If no width is specified, a non-floated block element will expand to fit the width of its parent minus padding.
The height of an element is calculated by the content’s height.
The width of an element is calculated by the content’s width.
By default, padding and border are not part of the width and height of an element.

Q3. What is the z-index in CSS? 
The z-index helps specify the stack order of positioned elements that may overlap one another. The z-index default value is zero and can take on either a positive or negative number.

An element with a higher z-index is always stacked above than a lower index.

Z-Index can take the following values:

Auto: Sets the stack order equal to its parents.
Number: Orders the stack order.
Initial: Sets this property to its default value (0).
Inherit: Inherits this property from its parent element.

Q4. What are CSS Sprites? 
CSS sprites combine multiple images into one single larger image. It is a commonly-used technique for icons (Gmail uses it). This is how you could implement it:

Use a sprite generator that packs multiple images into one and generates the appropriate CSS for it.
Each image would have a corresponding CSS class with background-image, background-position and background-size properties defined.
To use that image, add the corresponding class to your element.
CSS Interview Questions

Q5. Mention a few benefits of using CSS Sprites.
CSS sprites come with their own advantages. Here are a few of them –

Reduce the number of HTTP requests for multiple images (only one single request is required per sprite sheet). But with HTTP2, loading multiple images is no longer much of an issue.
Advance downloading of assets that won’t be downloaded until needed, such as images that only appear upon :hover pseudo-states. Blinking wouldn’t be seen.

Q6. What are pseudo-elements in CSS?
A CSS pseudo-element is a keyword added to a selector that lets you style a specific part of the selected element(s). They can be used for decoration (:first-line, :first-letter) or adding elements to the markup (combined with content: ...) without having to modify the markup (:before, :after).

:first-line and :first-letter can be used to decorate text.
Triangular arrows in tooltips use :before and :after. This encourages separation of concerns because the triangle is considered a part of styling and not really the DOM. It’s not really possible to draw a triangle with just CSS styles without using an additional HTML element.

Q7. How will you target an h2 and h3 with the same styling?

You can target multiple elements by separating the separators with a comma (,)

h2, h3 {

color: blue;

}

Q8. What is the float property used for in CSS?
The float CSS property places an element on the left or right side of its container, allowing text and inline elements to wrap around it. The element is removed from the normal flow of the page, though it still remains a part of the flow (in contrast to absolute positioning). Below is the usage of float

float: none;

float: left;

float: right;

Q9.  What are the different modules used in the current version of CSS?
There are several modules in CSS. Below are a few of them:

Selectors
Box Model
Backgrounds and Borders
Text Effects
2D/3D Transformations
Animations
Multiple Column Layout
User Interface

Q10. What are the different media types allowed by CSS?
There are four types of @media properties (including screen):

all – for all media type devices
print – for printers
speech – for screenreaders that “reads” the page out loud
screen – for computer screens, tablets, smart-phones etc.
Here is an example of print-media type’s usage:

@media print {

h1 {

background-color: yellow;

 }

}

Q11. What are the different units used in CSS?
CSS has two types of lengths. Relative length and absolute length. Different units are used for them.

Relative Length

UNIT	DESCRIPTION
em	Relative to the font-size of the element (2em means 2 times the size of the current font)
ex	Relative to the x-height of the current font (rarely used)
ch	Relative to the width of the “0” (zero)
rem	Relative to font-size of the root element
vw	Relative to 1% of the width of the viewport*
vh	Relative to 1% of the height of the viewport*
vmin	Relative to 1% of viewport’s* smaller dimension
vmax	Relative to 1% of viewport’s* larger dimension
%	Relative to the parent element
Absolute Length

UNIT	DESCRIPTION
CM	centimetres
MM	millimetres
IN	inches (1in = 96px = 2.54cm)
PX	pixels (1px = 1/96th of 1in)
PT	points (1pt = 1/72 of 1in)
PC	picas (1pc = 12 pt)

Q12. How do you control image repetition using CSS?
You can use the background-repeat property to control image.

Course Curriculum
Full Stack Web Developer Masters Program
h1 {

background-repeat: none;

 }

Q13. What is the general nomenclature of writing CSS?
CSS Notation - css interview questions - edurekaIf you look at the above image, you will notice that the styling commands are written in a property & value fashion. The property is, font-colour while the value is yellow. The CSS syntax also incorporates a statement terminator in the form of a semi-colon ‘;’. The entire style in then wrapped around curly braces and then attached to a selector(.boxes here). This creates a style that can be added to a style sheet and then applied to an HTML page. This is how CSS is written everywhere.

Q14. What will this piece of CSS code do to an element? .container { margin: 0 auto; }
When you have specified a width on the object that you have applied margin: 0 auto to, the object will sit centrally within its parent container. Specifying auto as the second parameter basically tells the browser to automatically determine the left and right margins itself, which it does by setting them equally. It guarantees that the left and right margins will be set to the same size. The first parameter 0 indicates that the top and bottom margins will both be set to 0.

margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto;
Therefore, to give you an example, if the parent is 100px and the child is 50px, then the auto property will determine that there’s 50px of free space to share between margin-left and margin-right:

var freeSpace = 100 - 50;
var equalShare = freeSpace / 2;

Which would give:

margin-left:25;
margin-right:25;

Q15. What is the overflow property in CSS used for?
The overflow property specifies what should happen if content overflows an element’s box. This property specifies whether to clip content or to add scrollbars when an element’s content is too big to fit in a specified area. Below are the overflow options available in CSS – 

overflow: auto;

overflow: none;

overflow: scroll;

overflow: visible;

Q16. What is the property that is used for controlling image-scroll?
The background-attachment property sets whether a background image scrolls with the rest of the page, or is fixed. Here is an example of a background-image that will not scroll with the page (fixed):

body {
  background-image: url("img_tree.gif");
  background-repeat: no-repeat;
  background-attachment: fixed;
}

Q17. What is responsive web design?
Responsive design is an approach to web page creation that makes use of flexible layouts, flexible images and cascading style sheet media queries. The goal of responsive design is to build web pages that detect the visitor’s screen size and orientation and change the layout accordingly.

Q18. What is the difference between {visibility: hidden} and {display: none}? 
display:none means that the tag in question will not appear on the page at all (although you can still interact with it through the DOM). There will be no space allocated for it between the other tags.

visibility:hidden means that unlike display:none, the tag is not visible, but space is allocated for it on the page. The tag is rendered, it just isn’t seen on the page.

For example:

test | <span style="[style-tag-value]">Appropriate style in this tag</span> | test
Replacing [style-tag-value] with display:none results in:

test |   | test
Replacing [style-tag-value] with visibility:hidden results in:

test |                        | test

Q19. Explain the concept of specificity in CSS.
Specificity is the means by which browsers decide which CSS property values are the most relevant to an element and, therefore, will be applied. Specificity is based on the matching rules which are composed of different sorts of CSS selectors.

Specificity is a weight that is applied to a given CSS declaration, determined by the number of each selector type in the matching selector. When multiple declarations have equal specificity, the last declaration found in the CSS is applied to the element. Specificity only applies when the same element is targeted by multiple declarations. As per CSS rules, directly targeted elements will always take precedence over rules which an element inherits from its ancestor.


Q20. What are the various font-related attributes in CSS?
Below are the different font-related attributes available in CSS:

Font-style
Font-variant
Font-weight
Font-size/line-height
Font-family
Caption
Icon

Q21. What is the use of box-shadow in CSS?
The box-shadow CSS property adds shadow effects around an element’s frame. You can set multiple effects separated by commas. A box-shadow is described by X and Y offsets relative to the element, color, blur and spread radii. Below are a few implementations of box-shadow

box-shadow: 10px 5px 5px red;

box-shadow: 60px -16px teal;

box-shadow: 12px 12px 2px 1px rgba(0, 0, 255, .2);

box-shadow: inset 5em 1em gold;

Q22. What are contextual selectors?
Contextual selectors in CSS allow you to specify different styles for different parts of your document. You can assign styles directly to specific HTML tags, or, you could create independent classes and assign them to tags in the HTML. Either approach lets you mix and match styles.

Q23. How would you style an image or element to have rounded corners?
Use the border-radius property to add rounded corners to an image. 50% will make the image circular.

border-radius: 50%;

Now let’s discuss some of the more advanced CSS interview questions.

Advanced CSS Interview Questions
Q24. What is CSS flexbox?
The flexbox layout officially called CSS flexible box layout module is a new layout module in CSS3. It is made to improve the items align, directions and order in the container even when they are with dynamic, or even unknown size. The prime characteristic of the flex container is the ability to modify the width or height of its children to fill the available space in the best possible way on different screen sizes.

flexbox - css interview questions - edureka-min (1)

Many designers and developers find this flexbox layout easier to use, as the positioning of the elements is simpler thus more complex layouts can be achieved with less code, leading to a simpler development process. Flexbox layout algorithm is direction based unlike the block or inline layout which are vertically and horizontally based. This flexbox layout should be used for small application components, while the new CSS Grid Layout Module is emerging to handle the large scale layouts.

Q25. How does a browser determine what elements match a CSS selector?
Browsers match selectors from rightmost (key selector) to left. Browsers filter out elements in the DOM according to the key selector and traverse up its parent elements to determine matches. The shorter the length of the selector chain, the faster the browser can determine if that element matches the selector.

For example with this selector p span, browsers firstly find all the <span> elements and traverse up its parent all the way up to the root to find the <p> element. For a particular <span>, as soon as it finds a <p>, it knows that the <span> matches and can stop its matching.

Q26. Explain the scenario you would use translate() instead of absolute positioning? 
Translate is a value of CSS transform. Changing transform or opacity does not trigger browser reflow or repaint but does trigger compositions; whereas changing the absolute positioning triggers reflow. Transform causes the browser to create a GPU layer for the element but changing absolute positioning properties uses the CPU. Hence translate() is more efficient and will result in shorter paint times for smoother animations.

When using translate(), the element still occupies its original space (sort of like position: relative), unlike in changing the absolute positioning.

Q27. Explain the difference in approach when designing a responsive website over a mobile-first strategy?
These two approaches are not exclusive. Making a website responsive means some elements will respond by adapting its size or other functionality according to the device’s screen size, typically the viewport width, through CSS media queries.

For example, making the font size smaller on smaller devices.

@media (min-width: 601px) {

.my-class {

font-size: 24px;

}

Programming & Frameworks Training
}

@media (max-width: 600px) {

.my-class {

font-size: 12px;

}

}

A mobile-first strategy is also responsive, however, it agrees we should default and define all the styles for mobile devices, and only add specific responsive rules to other devices later. Following the previous example:

.my-class {

font-size: 12px;

}

@media (min-width: 600px) {

.my-class {

font-size: 24px;

}

}

A mobile-first strategy has 2 main advantages:

It’s more performant on mobile devices since all the rules applied for them don’t have to be validated against any media queries
It forces to write cleaner code in respect to responsive CSS rules.

Q28. What are the different ways to position a certain element in CSS?
The position property specifies the type of positioning method used for an element.

There are five different position values:

position: fixed;

position: static;

position: absolute;

position: sticky;

position: relative;

Elements are then positioned using the top, bottom, left, and right properties. However, these properties will not work unless the position property is set first. They also work differently depending on the position value.

Q29. What is Block Formatting Context? How does it work?
A Block Formatting Context (BFC) is part of the visual CSS rendering of a web page in which block boxes are laid out. Floats, absolutely positioned elements, inline-blocks, table-cells, table-captions, and elements with overflow other than visible (except when that value has been propagated to the viewport) establish new block formatting contexts.

Knowing how to establish a block formatting context is important because without doing so, the containing box will not contain floated children. This is similar to collapsing margins but more insidious as you will find entire boxes collapsing in odd ways.

A BFC is an HTML box that satisfies at least one of the following conditions:

The value of float is not none.
The value of position is neither static nor relative.
The value of display is table-cell, table-caption, inline-block, flex, or inline-flex.
The value of overflow is not visible.
In a BFC, each box’s left outer edge touches the left edge of the containing block (for right-to-left formatting, right edges touch).


Q30. What effect would this piece of CSS code have? {box-sizing: border-box;}
By default, elements have box-sizing: content-box applied, and only the content size is being accounted for.
box-sizing: border-box changes how the width and height of elements are being calculated, border and padding are also being included in the calculation.
The height of an element is now calculated by the content’s height + vertical padding + vertical border width.
The width of an element is now calculated by the content’s width + horizontal padding + horizontal border width.
Taking into account paddings and borders as part of our box model resonates better with how designers actually imagine content in grids.
